2024年度
科学技術表現 (Q1,R1)
亀井且有
情報理工学部　特任教授
kamei@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
1
Week 1:
コースの紹介と概要
• 授業目的
• コース情報
• 授業スケジュール
• 教科書
• 受講における注意点
• 成績評価方法
• 授業概要
本日の内容
3
技術者および研究者にとって、論文や報告書を作成し口頭発表を行
う際に、的確明快に表現する能力は、研究開発能力とともに、非常
に重要である。
本講義では、学術論文や学会発表のための論理的な構成の作り方や
表現技術を教科書および資料を通して学ぶ。
授業目的
4
• コース名：81277（Q1）; 81278（R1）科学技術表現
• 教室：H322（Q1）; H322（R1）
• 担当者：亀井且有（情報理工学部特任教授）
• kamei@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
• コースニュース：
• コースメンバーとの重要／緊急事項の連絡ツール
• 毎日チェックすること
• 質問：
• 授業中に質問
• manaba+R個別指導を利用
コース情報
5
• 第2週04/18;10/03　対面 H322
• Ch. 1 Introduction
• Sec. Using This Book only
• Ch. 2 Getting Started
• 第3週04/25;10/10 Zoom
• Ch. 3 Reading and Reviewing
• up to Sec. Evaluation of Papers
• 第4週05/02;10/17 Zoom
• Ch. 4 Hypotheses, Questions, and Evidence
• 第5週05/09;10/24 Zoom
• Ch. 5 Writing a Paper (Part 1)
• up to Sec. Organization
授業スケジュール
6
• 第6週05/16;10/31 Zoom
• Ch. 5 Writing a Paper (Part2)
• up to the end
• 第7週05/23;11/07　対面 H322
• 第2～6週の小テスト
• Ch. 6 Good Style
• 第8週05/30;11/14　対面 H322
• 第7週の小テスト
• Ch. 7 Style Specifics
• 第9週06/06;11/21　対面 H322
• 第8週の小テスト
• Ch. 11 Graphs, Figures, and Tables
授業スケジュール 2
7
• 第10週06/13;11/28　対面 H322
• 第9週の小テスト
• Ch. 16 Presentations (Part 1)
• up to Sec. Presentation
• 第11週06/20;12/05　対面 H322
• 第10週の小テスト
• Ch. 16 Presentations (Part 2)
• up to the end
• 第12週06/27;12/12 Zoom
• グループワークによる論文紹介とプレゼン資料の作成
授業スケジュール 3
8
• 第13週07/04;12/19 Zoom
• グループワークによるプレゼン資料の相互評価
• レポート課題
• 第14週07/11;01/09　対面 H322
• 第11週の小テスト
• Ch. 17 Ethics
• 第15週07/18;01/16　対面 H322
• 第14週の小テスト
• 「論文の書き方講座」電子情報通信学会ビデオ
授業スケジュール 4
9
"Writing for Computer Science"
Third Edition
by
Justin Zobel
Published by Springer
Amazon Kindle版 5,791円
Web上のpdf版の存在も確認し
ている。しかし、それをダウン
ロードして利用することが、著
作権法に違反する恐れもあり、
Kindle版の購入を推奨する。
教科書
10
Justin Zobel
Writing for
Computer
Science
 Third Edition
• 授業範囲のテキストを授業開始までに読んでおく。
• 授業範囲全体の概要を把握したのち、精読するのがよい。
• Kindleには、翻訳機能がついているので、利用すると便利であ
る。ただし、正しい翻訳とは限らない。
• 授業終了後にmanaba+Rにアップされた資料を精読し、授業内容
の理解を深める。
• 授業の理解度を測るために小テストを実施（9:05開始）する。
• 第12週のプレゼン資料作成で引用する研究関連論文（自研究室以
外の著者、6ページ以上、図表を含む、和英は問わない）を授業
開始までに決定し、配布準備をする。
受講における注意点
11
授業への取組姿勢 15%
小テスト（11回） 55%
レポート 30%
合計　 100%
成績評価方法
12
授業概要
13
The role of this book is to help computer scientists with their writing
and research. For novices, it introduces the elements of a scientific
paper and reviews a wide range of issues that working researchers
need to consider.
Week 2
Ch. 1 Introduction
14
The topic of this chapter is about getting started: finding a question,
working with an advisor, and planning the research. The perspective
taken is a practical one, as a working scientist.
Week 2:
Ch. 2 Getting Started
15
A novice researcher can believe that the doing of research is
primarily about investigation—running experiments, developing
theory, or doing analysis. With experience, though, researchers
discover the importance of developing an understanding.
Week 3
Ch. 3 Reading and
Reviewing
16
The first stages of a research program involve choice of interesting
topics or problems, and then identification of particular issues to
investigate. The research is given direction by development of
specific questions that the program aims to answer.
Week 4
Ch. 4 Hypotheses,
Questions, and Evidence
17
The three main phases of a write-up are organizing materials so
that the work tells a story, giving this story the structure of a thesis
or of an academic paper, and actually writing. A paper or thesis,
then, is an outcome of a cycle of activity, from speculation through
definition and experimentation to write-up, with a range of obstacles
and issues that can arise on the way.
Week 5
Ch. 5: Writing a Paper
(Part 1)
18
For the first draft of a write-up you may find it helpful to write freely
—without particular regard to style, layout, or even punctuation—so
that you can concentrate on presenting a smooth flow of ideas in a
logical structure. Worrying about how to phrase each sentence
tends to result in text that is clear but doesn’t form a continuous
whole, and authors who are too critical on the first draft are often
unable to write anything at all.
Week 6
Ch. 5 Writing a Paper
(Part 2)
19
There are many ways in which an idea can be expressed in English;
writing can be verbose or cryptic, flowery or direct, poetic or literal.
The manner of expression is the writing style. Style is not about
correct use of grammar, but about how well you communicate with
likely readers.
Week 7
Ch. 6 Good Style
20
Good style is about clear, easy-to-read writing, which can be
achieved by following well-defined guidelines. These are not
arbitrary rules, but are principles that experienced writers follow. In
the previous chapter, some of these principles were reviewed. This
chapter concerns a range of specific problems that are common in
technical writing.
Week 8
Ch. 7 Style Specifics
21
Well-chosen illustrations breathe life into a paper, giving the reader
interesting visual elements to browse and highlighting the central
results and ideas. A typical figure consists of visual matter such as a
graph or diagram, or of textual matter such as a table, algorithm, or,
less commonly, complex mathematics.
Week 9
Ch. 11 Graphs, Figures, and
Tables
22
Scientists often have to talk about their work in front of an audience.
Even experienced speakers can feel intimidated when they have to
give a presentation, but the main challenges can be addressed with
a straightforward approach based on good preparation, careful
development of materials, and familiarity with the possible pitfalls. A
nervous researcher needs practice to become an accomplished
public speaker, but with the right approach even a first talk can be
successful.
Week 10
Ch. 16 Presentations
 (Part 1)
23
Question time at the end of a talk is used to clarify
misunderstandings and to amplify any points that listeners want
discussed in more detail. Five or ten minutes is too brief for serious
discussion: you need to keep answers short and avoid debating with
an audience member, because it is annoying for everyone else.
Week 11
Ch. 16 Presentations
 (Part 2)
24
• 授業開始までに、プレゼン資料の作成に引用する学術論文（6
ページ以上、自分の研究室以外の論文、図表を含む、和英は問わ
ない）を決定しておく。
• 授業中は、グループメンバーに論文を紹介しながら、プレゼン資
料を作成する。
• プレゼン資料は発表時間を10分と仮定する。
Week 12
GWによるプレゼン資料の作
成
25
• 作成したプレゼン資料をグループメンバーに配布する。
• テキスト第11章および第16章に基づきプレゼン資料をメンバー
相互で評価する。
• Chapter 11: Graphs, Figures, and Tables
• Chapter 16: Presentations
• 相互評価で指摘された点を修正する。
• レポート課題を公開する。
Week 13
GWによるプレゼン資料の相
互評価およびレポート課題
26
Science is built on trust. Researchers are expected to be honest,
and research is assumed to have been undertaken ethically. For
example, referees assess whether results are significant but are not
expected to investigate whether the reported experiments actually
took place, because it is assumed that the authors have not lied
about their work.
Week 14
Ch. 17 Ethics
27
• 論文の書き方（和文）
• 高橋応明（千葉大学）
• 論文の書き方（英文）【初級編】
• 岩井 誠人（同志社大学）
• https://www.ieice.org/~cs-edit/magazine/ronbun_kouza.html
Week 15
「論文の書き方講座」
電子情報通信学会ビデオ
28



----------------WEEK2-------------------


Week 2: Chapter 1
Introduction
"Writing for Computer Science"
Third Edition
by
Justin Zobel
1
There are many good general books on writing style and research
methods, but the conventions of style vary from discipline to
discipline, and broad guidance on science writing can be wrong or
irrelevant for a specific area. Some topics—such as algorithms,
mathematics, and research methods for computer science—are not
discussed in these books at all.
Using This Book
2
The role of this book is to help computer scientists with their writing
and research. For novices, it introduces the elements of a scientific
paper and reviews a wide range of issues that working researchers
need to consider. For experienced researchers, it provides a
reference point against which they can assess their own views and
abilities, and is an exposure to wider cultures of research. This book
is also intended to encourage reflection; some chapters pose
questions about research that a responsible researcher should
address. Nobody can learn to write or become a researcher just by
reading this book, or indeed any book. To become competent it is
necessary to practice, that is, to do research and write it up in
collaboration with experienced researchers. However, familiarity
with the elements of writing and research is essential in scientific
training.
Using This Book 2
3
Style is in some respects a matter of taste. The advice in this book
is not a code of law to be rigidly obeyed; it is a collection of
guidelines, not rules, and there are inevitably situations in which the
“correct” style will seem wrong. But generally there are good
reasons for writing in a certain way. Almost certainly you will
disagree with some of the advice in this book, but exposure to
another opinion should lead you to justify your own choice of style,
rather than by habit continue with what may be poor writing. A good
principle is: By all means break a rule, but have a good reason for
doing so.
Using This Book 3
4
Most computer scientists can benefit from reading a book about
writing and research. This book can be used as the principal text for
a senior research methods subject, or for a series of lectures on the
practice of research. Such a subject would not necessarily follow
this book chapter by chapter, but instead use it as a resource. In my
own teaching of research methods, lectures on writing style seem to
work best as introductions to the key topics of good writing; talking
students through the detailed advice given here is less effective
than getting them to read the book while they write and undertake
research for themselves. That said, for a range of topics—figures,
algorithms, presentations, statistics, reading and reviewing, drafting,
ethics, and experimentation, for example—the relevant chapter can
be used as the basis of one or two lectures.
Using This Book 4
5
Week 2: Chapter 2
Getting Started
"Writing for Computer Science"
Third Edition
by
Justin Zobel
6
There are many ways in which a research project can begin. It may
be that a conversation with a colleague suggested interesting
questions to pursue, or that your general interest in a topic was
crystallized into a specific investigation by something learnt in a
seminar, or that enrollment in a research degree forced you to
identify a problem to work on. Then definite aims are stated;
theories are developed or experiments are undertaken; and the
outcomes are written up.
The topic of this chapter is about getting started: finding a question,
working with an advisor, and planning the research. The perspective
taken is a practical one, as a working scientist: What kinds of stages
and events does a researcher have to manage in order to produce
an interesting, valid piece of work? This chapter, and Chaps. 3, 4,
14, and 15, complement other parts of the book—which are largely
on the topic of how research should be described—by considering
how the content of paper is arrived at.
Preface
7
Thus this chapter concerns the first of the steps involved in doing a
research project, which broadly are:
• Formation of a precise question, the answer to which will satisfy
the aim of the research.
• Development of a detailed understanding, through reading and
critical analysis of scientific literature and other resources.
• Gathering of evidence that relates to the question, through
experiment, analysis, or theory. These are intended to support—
or disprove—the hypothesis underlying the question.
• Linking of the question and evidence with an argument, that is, a
chain of reasoning.
• Description of the work in a publication.
Preface 2
8
Learning to do research involves acquisition of a range of separate
skills. It takes experience to see these skills as part of a single
integrated “process of research”. That is, many people learn to be
researchers by working step by step under supervision; only after
having been through the research process once or twice does the
bigger picture become evident.
Some newcomers try to pursue research as if it were some other
kind of activity. For example, in computer science many research
students see experimentation as a form of software development,
and undertake a research write-up as if they were assembling an
essay, a user manual, or software documentation. Part of learning
to be a scientist is recognition of how the aims of research differ
from those of coursework.
Preface 3
9
A perspective on research is that it is the process that leads to
papers and theses, because these represent our store of accepted
scientific knowledge. Another perspective is that it is about having
impact; by creating new knowledge, successful research changes
the practices and understandings of other scientists. Our work must
be adopted in some way by others if it is to be of value. Thus
another part of learning to be a scientist is coming to understand
that publication is not an end in itself, but is part of an ongoing
collaborative enterprise.
Preface 4
10
The origin of a research investigation is typically a moment of
insight. A student attending a lecture wonders why search engines
do not provide better spelling correction. A researcher investigating
external sorting is at a seminar on file compression, and ponders
whether one could be of benefit to the other. An advisor is frustrated
by network delays and questions whether the routing algorithm is
working effectively. A student asks a professor about the possibility
of research on evaluation of code reliability; the professor, who
hadn’t previously contemplated such work, realizes that it could
build on recent advances in type theory. Tea-room arguments are a
rich source of seed ideas. One person is idly speculating, just to
make conversation; another pursues the speculation and a research
topic is created. Or someone claims that a researcher’s idea is
unworkable, and a listener starts to turn over the arguments. What
makes it unworkable? How might those issues be addressed?
Beginnings
11
This first step is a subjective one: to choose to explore ideas that
seem likely to succeed, or are intriguing, or have the potential to
lead to something new, or that contradict received wisdom. At the
beginning, it isn’t possible to know whether the work is novel or will
lead to valuable results; otherwise there would be no scope for
research. The final outcome is an objective scientific report, but
curiosity and guesswork are what establish research directions.
Beginnings 2
12
It is typically at this stage that a student becomes involved in the
research. Some students have a clear idea of what they want to
pursue—whether it is feasible, rational, or has research potential is
another matter—but the majority are in effect shopping for a topic
and advisor. They have a desire to work on research and to be
creative, perhaps without any definite idea of what research is. They
are drawn by a particular area or problem, or want to work with a
particular individual. Students may talk through a range of possible
projects with several alternative advisors before making a definite
choice and starting to work on a research problem in earnest.
Beginnings 3
13
How a potential research topic is shaped into a defined project
depends on context. Experienced scientists aiming to write a paper
on a subject of mutual interest tend to be fairly focused: they quickly
design a series of experiments or theoretical goals, investigate the
relevant literature, and set deadlines.
For students, doing a research project additionally involves training,
which affects how the work proceeds. Also, for a larger research
program such as a Ph.D., there are both short-term and long-term
goals: short-term goals include the current specific explorations,
which may be intended to lead to an initial research paper; the longterm goals are the wider investigation that will eventually form the
basis of the student’s thesis.
Shaping a Research Project
14
At the beginning of a research program, then, you need to establish
answers to two key questions. First, what is the broad problem to be
investigated? Second, what are the specific initial activities to
undertake and outcomes to pursue? Having clear short-term
research goals gives shape to a research program. It also gives the
student training in the elements of research: planning, reading,
programming, testing, analysis, critical thinking, writing, and
presentation.
Shaping a Research Project 2
15
When developing a topic into a research question, it is helpful to
explore what makes the topic interesting. Productive research is
often driven by a strong motivating example, which also helps focus
the activity towards useful goals. It can be easy to explore problems
that are entirely hypothetical, but difficult to evaluate the
effectiveness of any solutions. Sometimes it is necessary to make a
conscious decision to explore questions where work can be done,
rather than where we would like to work; just as medical studies
may involve molecular simulations rather than real patients, robotics
may involve the artifice of soccer-playing rather than the reality of
planetary exploration.
Shaping a Research Project 3
16
In choosing a topic and advisor, many students focus on the
question of “is this the most interesting topic on offer?”, often to the
exclusion of other questions that are equally important. One such
question is “is this advisor right for me?” Students and advisors form
close working relationships that, in the case of a Ph.D., must endure
for several years. The student is typically responsible for most of the
effort, but the intellectual input is shared, and the relationship can
grow over time to be a partnership of equals. However, most
relationships have moments of tension, unhappiness, or
disagreement. Choosing the right person—considering the advisor
as an individual, not just as a respected researcher—is as important
as choosing the right topic. A charismatic or famous advisor isn’t
necessarily likeable or easy to work with.
Shaping a Research Project 4
17
Another important question is, is this project at the right kind of
technical level? Some brilliant students are neither fast
programmers nor systems experts, while others do not have strong
mathematical ability. It is not wise to select a project for which you
do not have the skills or that doesn’t make use of your strengths.
An alternative perspective on the issue of how to choose a topic is
this: most projects that are intellectually challenging are interesting
to undertake; agonizing over whether a particular option is the
project may not be productive. However, it is also true that some
researchers only enjoy their work if they can identify a broader
value: for example, they can see likely practical outcomes. Highly
speculative projects leave some people dissatisfied, while others
are excited by the possibility of a leap into the future.
Shaping a Research Project 5
18
When evaluating a problem, a factor to consider is the barrier to
entry, that is, the knowledge, infrastructure, or resources required to
do work in a particular field. Sometimes it just isn’t possible to
pursue a certain direction, because of the costs, or because no-one
in your institution has the necessary expertise.
As research fields mature, there is a tendency for the barrier to
entry to rise: the volume of background knowledge a new
researcher must master is increased, the scope for interesting
questions is narrowed, the straightforward or obvious lines of
investigation have been explored, and the standard of the baselines
is high. If a field is popular or well-developed, it may make more
sense to explore other directions.
Shaping a Research Project 6
19
Project scale is a related issue. Some students are wildly ambitious,
entering research with the hope of achieving something of dramatic
significance. However, major breakthroughs are by definition rare—
otherwise, they wouldn’t be major— while, as most researchers
discover, even a minor advance can be profoundly rewarding.
Moreover, an ambitious project creates a high potential for failure,
especially in a shorter-term project such as a minor thesis. There is
a piece of folklore that says that most scientists do their best work in
their Ph.D. This is a myth, and is certainly not a good reason for
tackling a problem that is too large to resolve.
For a novice researcher, it makes sense to identify outcomes that
can clearly be achieved; this is research training, after all, not
research olympics. A principle is to pursue the smallest question
that is interesting. If these outcomes are reached early on, it should
be straightforward, in a well-designed project, to move on to more
challenging goals.
Shaping a Research Project 7
20
Some research is concerned with problems that appear to be solved
in commercial or production software. Often, however, research on
such problems can be justified. In a typical commercial
implementation the task is to find a workable solution, while in
research the quality of that solution must be measured, and thus
work on the same problem that produces similar solutions can
nonetheless have different outcomes. Moreover, while it is in a
company’s interests to claim that a problem is solved by their
technology, such claims are not easily verified. In some cases,
investigation of a problem for which there is already a commercial
solution can be of as much value as investigation of a problem of
purely academic interest.
Shaping a Research Project 8
21
Students commencing their first research project are accustomed to
the patterns of undergraduate study: attending lectures, completing
assignments, revising for exams. Activity is determined by a
succession of deadlines that impose a great deal of structure.
In contrast, a typical research project has just one deadline:
completion. Administrative requirements may impose some
additional milestones, such as submission of a project outline or a
progress report, but many students (and advisors) do not take these
milestones seriously. However, having a series of deadlines is
critical to the success of a project. The question then is, what should
these deadlines be and how should they be determined?
Research Planning
22
A strong approach to the task of defining a project and setting
milestones is to explicitly consider what is needed at the end, then
reason backwards. The final thing required is the write-up in the
form of a thesis, paper, or report; so you need to plan in terms of the
steps necessary to produce the write-up. As an example, consider
research that is expected to have a substantial experimental
component; the write-up is likely to involve a background review,
explanations of previous and new algorithms, descriptions of
experiments, and analysis of outcomes. Completion of each of
these elements is a milestone.
Experiments may also involve users. Who will they be? Is ethics
clearance required? Computer scientists, accustomed to working
with algorithms and proofs, are often surprised by how wide-ranging
their university ethics requirements can be.
Research Planning 2
23
Two points here are worth emphasizing. First, while the components
of a research project should be identified in advance, they do not
necessarily have to be completed in turn. Second, we should plan
research with the following attitude: what evidence must we collect
to convince a skeptical reader that the results are correct? A
successful research outcome rests on finding a good answer to this
question.
A traditional research strategy is to first read the literature, then
design, then analyze or implement, then test or evaluate, then write
up. A more effective strategy is to overlap these stages as much as
possible. You should begin the implementation, analysis, and writeup as soon as it is reasonable to do so.
Research Planning 3
24
For the long-term research activity of a Ph.D., there are other
considerations that become significant. A typical concern in the later
stages of a Ph.D. is whether enough research has yet been done,
or whether additional new work needs to be undertaken. Often the
best response to this question is to write the thesis. Once your
thesis is more or less complete, it should be easy to assess whether
further work is justified. Doing such additional work probably
involves filling a well-defined gap, a task that is much better defined
than that of fumbling around for further questions to investigate.
Research Planning 4
25
The purpose of a research program—a Ph.D., masters, or minor
thesis—is for the university to provide a student with research
training, while the student demonstrates the capability to undertake
research from conception to write-up, including such skills as
working independently and producing novel, critical insights. A sidebenefit is that the student, often with the advisor, should produce
some publishable research. There are a range of approaches to
advising that achieve these aims, but they are all based on the
strategy of learning while doing.
Students and Advisors
26
Some advisors, for example, set their students problems such as
verifying a proof in a published paper and seeing whether it can be
applied to variants of the theorem, thus, in effect, getting the student
to explore the limits at which the theorem no longer applies. Another
example is to attempt to confirm someone else’s results, by downloading code or by developing a fresh implementation. The
difficulties encountered in such efforts are a fertile source of
research questions. Other advisors immediately start their students
on activities that are expected to lead to a research publication. It is
in this last case that the model of advising as apprenticeship is most
evident.
Students and Advisors 2
27
Typically, in the early stages the advisor specifies each small step
the student should take: running a certain experiment, identifying a
suitable source of data, searching the literature to resolve a
particular question, or writing one small section of a proposed
paper. As students mature into researchers, they become more
independent, often by anticipating what their advisors will ask, while
advisors gradually leave more space for their students to assert this
independence. Over time, the relationship becomes one of
guidance rather than management.
Students and Advisors 3
28
The student–advisor relationship is not only concerned with
research training, but is a means for advisors to be involved in
research on a particular topic. Thus students and advisors often
write papers together. At times, this can be a source of conflict,
when, for example, an advisor wants a student to work on a paper
while the student wants to make progress on a thesis. On the other
hand, the involvement of the advisor—and the incentive for the
advisor to take an active role—means that the research is
undertaken as teamwork.
Students and Advisors 4
29
Over the years I have noticed that there are several characteristics
that are shared by successful research students. First, they show a
willingness to read widely, to explore the field broadly beyond their
specific topic, to try things out, and to generally take part in the
academic community. Second, they have the enthusiasm to develop
their interest in some area, and then ask for advice on how that
interest can be turned into a thesis project. Third, they have the
ability and persistence to undertake a detailed (and even grueling)
investigation of a specific facet of a larger topic. Fourth, they take
the initiative in terms of what needs to be done and how to present
it, and gradually assume responsibility for all aspects of the
research. Fifth, they are systematic and organized, and understand
the need for rigour [rigorous], discipline, stringency, quality, and high
standards. Sixth, they actively reflect on habits and working
practices, and seek to improve themselves and overcome their
limitations and knowledge gaps. Seventh, their work looks plausible;
it has the form and feel of high-quality published papers. Last, they
have the strength to keep working despite some significant failed or
unsuccessful activity; in a Ph.D., loss of months of work is not
unusual.
Students and Advisors 5
30
Note that neither “brilliance” nor “genius” is in this list. Intellectual
capacity is important, but many bright people do not become
outstanding Ph.D. students— sometimes, because they
underestimate the challenge of extended study. Indeed, I’ve
supervised several students whose previous academic record was
uninspiring but who nonetheless produced a strong thesis, in
particular because they were persistent and resilient enough to
pursue their work despite setbacks and obstacles.
Students and Advisors 6
31
• Is your proposed topic clearly a research activity? Is it consistent
with the aims and purposes of research?
• How is your project different from, say, software development,
essay writing, or data analysis?
• In the context of your project, what are the area, topic, and
research question? (How are these concepts distinct from each
other?)
• Is the project of appropriate scale, with challenges that are a
match to your skills and interests? Is the question narrow enough
to give you confidence that the project is achievable?
• Is the project distinct from other active projects in your research
group? Is it clear that the anticipated outcomes are interesting
enough to justify the work?
A “Getting Started” Checklist
32
• Is it clear what skills and contributions you bring to the project,
and what will be contributed by your advisor? What skills do you
need to develop?
• What resources are required and how will you obtain them?
• What are the likely obstacles to completion, or the greatest
difficulties? Do you know how these will be addressed?
• Can you write down a road map, with milestones, that provides a
clear path to the anticipated research outcomes?
• Do you and your advisor have an agreed method for working
together, with a defined schedule of meetings?
A “Getting Started” Checklist 2
33
34



