Week 3: Chapter 3
Reading and Reviewing
"Writing for Computer Science"
Third Edition
by
Justin Zobel
1
A novice researcher can believe that the doing of research is
primarily about investigation—running experiments, developing
theory, or doing analysis. With experience, though, researchers
discover the importance of developing an understanding. It has
been argued that many experimental researchers do their best work
after they have been in a field for five years or more, because it
takes time to acquire a deep, thorough appreciation of the area, and
of existing knowledge and its limitations. To acquire this
understanding, you need to become an effective reader of research
papers.
Preface
2
A successful reader can identify the contributions and value of a
paper, while recognizing its flaws; and uses critical scrutiny to
identify the extent to which the flaws in a paper are serious. This
reading then informs new work, directly as a source of knowledge
and indirectly as a guide to how to produce work that will be
appreciated. A particular application of reading, moreover, is to
become a reliable referee or examiner.
Preface
3
By the time your research is complete, you need to be confident that
you have read and understood all of the scientific literature that has
a significant connection to your work. Your reading achieves several
aims. It establishes that your work is indeed novel or innovative; it
helps you to understand current theory, discoveries, and debates; it
can identify new lines of questioning or investigation; and it should
provide alternative perspectives on your work. This reading will
ultimately be summarized in the background sections and the
discussions of related work in your write-ups.
Research Literature
4
The literature on which your work will rely is usually expected to be
papers that have been refereed and published in a reputable venue,
theses that have been undertaken and examined at a reputable
institution, and books that are based on the information presented in
refereed theses and books. These are the documents that are
accepted by the research community as a source of knowledge;
indeed, they can be regarded as being the entirety of our scientific
knowledge. The literature does not include primary sources such as
lab notebooks, responses to a survey, or outputs from an
experiment. What these lack is interpretation of the contents in light
of a specific hypothesis. Other literature—news articles, science
magazines, Wikipedia pages, or documentation, for example—may
alert you to the existence of reputable work, but is rarely worth
citing. That is, your learning may be built on a wider literature, but
the arguments in your write-up should be based on knowledge that
is from a refereed source.
Research Literature 2
5
A thorough search of the literature can easily lead to discovery of
hundreds of potentially relevant papers. However, papers are not
textbooks, and should not be treated as textbooks. A researcher
reading a paper is not studying for an exam; there is rarely a need
to understand every line.
Thus it is important to become an effective reader, by giving each
paper neither more nor less time that it deserves. The first time you
read a paper, skim through it to identify the extent to which it is
relevant—only read it thoroughly if there is likely to be value in doing
so. Make the effort to properly understand the details, but always
beware of details that may be wrong, or garbled.
Research Literature 3
6
Expect to have a range of modes of reading:
1. browsing to find papers and get an overview of activity and to
understand the main outcomes in a body of work;
2. background reading of texts and popular science magazines;
3. and thorough, focused reading of key or complex papers that
stretch your abilities or the limits of your understanding.
Research Literature 4
7
Comprehensive exploration of relevant literature involves following
several intertwined paths:
• Use obvious search terms to explore the Web. You are likely to
find, not just papers, but also home pages for projects and teams
concerned with the same research area.
• Some of the major search engines have search tools that are
specifically for academic papers.
• Visit the websites of research groups and researchers working in
the area. These sites should give several kinds of links into the
wider literature.
• Follow up the references in promising research papers.
• Browse the recent issues of the journals and conferences in the
area.
Finding Research Papers
8
• Search the publisher-specific digital libraries. These include
publishers such as Wiley and Springer, and professional societies
such as the ACM and IEEE.
• Most conferences have websites that list the program, that is, the
papers to appear in the conference that year.
• Consider using the citation indexes.
• Go to the library. The simple strategy of having similar material
shelved together often leads to unexpected discoveries.
• Discuss your work with as many people as possible. Some of
them may well know of relevant work you haven’t encountered.
Finding Research Papers 2
9
The process of search and discovery of useful papers can be
thought of as a form of learning. Each paper or page that you find
should refine your understanding of the terminology, help indicate
which papers are significant, suggest new directions to follow up,
and further clarify your criteria for whether a paper is “in” or “out”.
Take a broad definition of “relevant” when searching for papers.
Finding all relevant work is hard; for example, exhaustive
professional searches across the medical research literature can
take months of full-time work. But finding all significant work is a
critical part of doing research. It is typically the case, too, that the
scope of literature that is relevant to you may only be obvious once
you have completed the investigative phase of your research and
have a good draft of your literature review. Your topic and interests
are likely to shift, focus, or broaden during your research, and your
perspective will change as your understanding develops— update
your searching as you go.
Finding Research Papers 3
10
Searching and reading are separate activities, and it is a mistake to
try and do both at once. I recommend that you uncritically gather
material and then later critically analyze and categorize. Save the
papers you find into a directory, and go through it later to
understand what you have found. In the context of a single search
session, it is also helpful to restrict your attention to one or two
specific topics.
Having explored the literature, you may discover that your original
idea is not so original after all. If so, be honest—review your work to
see what aspects may be novel, but don’t fool yourself into working
on a problem that is already solved.
Finding Research Papers 4
11
A key aim of reading is to develop critical thinking skills. Good
researchers must demonstrate their ability to objectively analyze the
work and claims of others. With experience, you can place each
paper in a context of other work that you know, and assess it on a
range of characteristics.
Much research—far too much—is just misguided. People
investigate problems that are already solved and well understood,
or solve problems that technology has made irrelevant, or don’t
realize that the proposed improvement actually makes the method
worse. Mathematics may be pointless; the wrong property may be
proved, such as complexity instead of correctness; assumptions
may be implausible; evaluation strategies may not make sense. The
data set used may be so tiny that the results are meaningless.
Some results are just plain wrong. And, while the fact that a paper is
refereed is an indicator that it is of value, it is not a guarantee. Many
people undertake work that did not deserve to be written;
sometimes it gets published.
Critical Reading
12
Indeed, few papers are perfect. They are a presentation of new
work rather than a considered explanation of well-known results,
and the constraints of writing to a deadline mean that mistakes are
undiscovered and some issues unexplored. Some aspects of older
papers may be superseded or irrelevant, or may rely on limited or
technically outdated assumptions. A paper can be seen as a
snapshot of a research program at a moment in time—what the
researchers knew when they submitted. For all these reasons, a
reader needs to be questioning, balanced, and skeptical. In short,
don’t accept something as true just because it was published. But
that does not justify researchers being dismissive of past work;
rather, they should respect it and learn from it, because their own
work is likely to have similar strengths and weaknesses. Some
inexperienced researchers see other work as either perfect or poor,
with nothing in-between. Usually, neither of these extremes is
correct.
Critical Reading 2
13
Read papers by asking critical questions of them, such as:
• Is there a contribution? Is it significant?
• Is the contribution of interest?
• Are the results correct?
• Is the appropriate literature discussed?
• Does the methodology actually answer the initial question?
• Are the proposals and results critically analyzed?
• Are appropriate conclusions drawn from the results, or are there
other possible interpretations?
• Are all the technical details correct? Are they sensible?
• Could the results be verified?
• Are there any serious ambiguities or inconsistencies?
Critical Reading 3
14
That is, actively attempt to identify the contributions and
shortcomings rather than simply reading from one end to the other.
This analysis of a paper can be thought of as verifying that each
component is robust. If the paper is important to your work, you
should analyze it until you have formed a reasoned opinion about
each of its components; and if some components are questionable,
this should be reflected in your literature review.
Write down your analysis of the paper—you will read hundreds of
papers, and in some cases will not formally describe them until
months or years later. However, detailed analysis can be difficult
before you have undertaken your own work, and in so doing
developed a mature perspective. Thus reviewing of literature should
not stop when the investigation begins, but continue alongside the
research.
Critical Reading 4
15
A literature review is a structured analysis of a body of literature,
and may cover work from several separate areas of research. This
review is not simply a list of these papers. Rather, the papers should
be grouped by topic, and critically discussed in a way that allows the
reader to understand their contribution to the field, their limitations,
and the questions that they leave open.
Developing a Literature Review
16
Begin a rough literature review as soon as you start reading, and,
when you read a paper that you think will need to be discussed, add
it in. (You should also capture the bibliographic data as you go, and
also keep a copy of every paper you read.) Initially, the literature
review will be sketchy and unstructured, but as you add papers you
can group them by topic and contribution, and add notes on each
paper and how they relate to each other. Briefly summarize each
paper’s contribution and the evidence used to support the claims,
and also note any shortcomings or features that are of interest. You
might also want to note, for your own reference, how the work might
have been done better: for example, are there obvious experiments
that should have been tried, or plausible counter-arguments to the
claims? Keep in mind that your understanding of other work helps
examiners to judge your abilities as a researcher.
Developing a Literature Review 2
17
As your review proceeds, it will become easier to decide whether to
include each of the papers you read. Many obvious factors will
guide your decisions: how close some other work is to yours, or how
influential it has been. Some factors may be more subtle. For
example, you may find a survey paper, or a recent paper with a
thorough literature review of its own, that means that many of the
older papers do not need to be discussed.
I suggest that in early drafts you be as inclusive as possible. When
you do remove discussion of a paper, put the discussion in another
file (or comment it out) rather than deleting it altogether, as this text
is your record of having read the paper.
Developing a Literature Review 3
18
When an author completes a paper, it is submitted to the editor of a
journal (or the program chai[r] of a conference) for publication. The
editor sends the paper to referees, who evaluate the paper and
return assessments. The editor then uses these assessments to
decide whether the paper should be accepted, or, in the case of a
journal paper, whether further reviewing or revision is required.
Authors are expected to be honest, ethical, and careful in their
preparation of papers. It is ultimately the responsibility of the author
—not of the journal, the editor, or the referees—to ensure that the
contents of a paper are correct. It is also the author’s responsibility
to ensure that the presentation is at an appropriate standard and
that it is their own work unless otherwise stated.
Authors, Editors, and Referees
19
Referees should be fair and objective, maintain confidentiality, and
avoid conflict of interest. In addition, they should complete reviews
promptly, declare their limitations as referees, take proper care in
evaluating the paper, and only recommend acceptance when they
are confident that the paper is of adequate standard. Although
referees can generally assume that authors have behaved ethically,
many weak or flawed papers are submitted, and a disproportionate
amount of reviewing is spent on such papers—in part, because they
are often resubmitted after rejection. Moreover, it would be negligent
of a referee to assume that a paper is correct and interesting for
superficial reasons such as good writing, impressive mathematics,
or author prestige. Referees must also ensure that their reviews are
accurate and of an appropriate standard.
Authors, Editors, and Referees 2
20
The editor’s responsibilities are to choose referees appropriately,
ensure that the reviewing is completed promptly and to an adequate
standard, arbitrate when the referees’ evaluations differ or when the
authors argue that a referee’s evaluation is incorrect, and use the
reviews to decide whether the paper should be accepted.
These participants have very different perspectives. At submission,
an author may feel that the work is remarkable and perfected, and is
likely to be sensitive to criticism. Even researchers who are not
working in the environment of a first-rate research centre, or who
have never had guidance from a more experienced researcher, may
well be convinced that their papers are excellent and that negative
comments are misguided. A consequence is that they may seek
ways to address issues raised by referees by making only minimal
changes, and need to be persuaded through convincing argument
that the referees’ views are reasonable.
Authors, Editors, and Referees 3
21
In contrast, the referee and editor are likely to feel unexcited (the
majority of submissions are rejected) and disbelieving—in
submissions, strong results are usually wrong. And they too may be
sensitive, in this case to typical, frustrating faults, and also to undue
criticism of their own work in the author’s literature review. In a
sense, the reviewing process can be seen as a mechanism for
reconciling these different points of view.
Authors, Editors, and Referees 4
22
Contribution is the main criterion for judging a paper. In broad terms,
a paper is a contribution if it has two properties: originality and
validity.
The originality of a paper is the degree to which the ideas presented
are significant, new, and interesting. Most papers are to some
degree extensions or variations of previously published work; really
groundbreaking ideas are rare. Nonetheless, interesting or
important ideas are more valuable than trivial increments to existing
work. Deciding whether there is sufficient originality to warrant
publication is the main task of the referee.
Contribution
23
When evaluating the significance of a contribution, it is helpful to
consider its effect, or impact: that is, to judge how much change
would follow from the paper being published and widely read. If the
only likely effect is passing interest from a few specialists in the
area, the paper is minor. If, on the other hand, the likely effect is a
widespread change of practice or a flow of interesting new results
from other researchers, the paper is indeed groundbreaking.
The validity of a paper is the degree to which the ideas have been
shown to be sound. A paper that does no more than claim from
intuition that the proposal should hold is not valid. Good science
requires a demonstration of correctness, in a form that allows
verification by other scientists. As discussed in Chap. 4 such a
demonstration is usually by proof or analysis, modeling, simulation,
or experiment, or preferably several of these methods together, and
is likely to involve some kind of comparison to existing ideas.
Contribution 2
24
In the area of algorithms, proof and analysis are the accepted
means of showing that a proposal is worthwhile. The use of theory
and mathematical analysis is one of the cornerstones of computer
science: computer technology is ephemeral but theoretical results
are timeless. Their very durability, however, creates a need for
certainty: an untrustworthy analysis is not valuable. Thus a paper
reporting experimental work can be a significant contribution. The
experiment, to be of sufficient interest, should test behaviour that
had not previously been examined empirically, or contradict “known”
results.
Contribution 3
25
Demonstrations of validity, whether by theory or experiment, should
be rigorous: carefully described, thorough, and verifiable.
Experiments for assessment of algorithms should be based on a
good implementation; experiments based on statistical tests of
subjects should use sufficiently large samples and appropriate
controls. Comparison to existing work is an important part of the
demonstration of validity. A new algorithm that is inferior to existing
alternatives is unlikely to be significant.
Contribution 4
26
The process of evaluating a paper involves asking critical questions
such as those listed under “Critical reading” earlier in this chapter. In
addition, there are further questions that should be asked of a paper
that is under review, which should not just be correct but should be
suitable for the likely audience.
• Is the contribution timely or only of historical interest?
• Is the topic relevant to the venue’s typical readership?
• What is missing? What would complete the presentation? Is any
of the material unnecessary?
• How broad is the likely readership?
• Can the paper be understood? Is it clearly written? Is the
presentation at an adequate standard?
• Does the content justify the length?
Evaluation of Papers
27
Most papers have an explicit or implicit hypothesis—some assertion
that is claimed to be true—and a proposal or innovation. Try to
identify what the hypothesis is: if you can’t identify it, there is
probably something wrong, and if you can, it will help you to
recognize whether all of the paper is pertinent to the hypothesis,
and whether important material is missing.
Evaluation of Papers 2
28
The quality of a paper can be reflected in its bibliography. For
example, how many references are there? This is a crude rule-ofthumb, but often effective. For some research problems there are
only a few relevant papers, but such cases are the exception. The
presence of only a few references may be evidence of bad
scholarship. Also, some authors cite a reasonable number of papers
without actually citing related literature, thus disguising a core
bibliography that is far too short. If many of the references are by
the author, it may be that some of them are redundant. If only a
couple of the references are recent, the author doesn’t appear to be
familiar with other research. Similarly, be suspicious of papers with
no references to the major journals or conferences in the area.
Expect author-provided evidence of novelty and innovation, via the
right citations.
Evaluation of Papers 3
29
Referees should make an effort to search for errors that don’t affect
the quality of the work but should be corrected before going into
print. These include spelling and syntax, written expression, errors
in the bibliography, whether all concepts and terms have been
defined or explained, errors in any formulas or mathematics, and
inconsistency in just about anything from variable names to table
layout to formatting of the bibliography. Some of these kinds of
errors may be picked up in the typesetting process, if the paper is to
appear in a journal, but many of them won’t be. In particular, only a
referee is likely to find errors in mathematics.
Evaluation of Papers 4
30
Such errors can become more serious defects that might make the
paper unacceptable. A few typographic errors in the mathematics
are to be expected, for example, but if the subscripts are mixed up
or the notation keeps changing case then it is quite likely that the
author has not checked the results with sufficient care; it may well
be reasonable to reject the paper and expect the author to review it
before submitting again.
Similar arguments apply to the presentation: to a certain extent
poorly written papers should be accepted (however reluctantly), but
real incompetence in the presentation is grounds for rejection,
because a paper is of no value if it cannot be read. But note that the
converse does not apply: excellence in presentation does not justify
acceptance. Occasionally a referee receives a paper that is well
written and shows real care in the development of the results, but
which does no more than reproduce existing work. Such papers
must, regrettably, be rejected.
Evaluation of Papers 5
31
32