Week 5: Chapter 5
Writing a Paper
(Part 1)
"Writing for Computer Science"
Third Edition
by
Justin Zobel
1
In every research project, a stage is reached at which it makes
sense to begin to write up. A good principle is to begin early: if it is
possible to start writing, then writing should start. Shaping the
research and its outcomes into a write-up is an effective way of
giving structure to a project, even if the work itself has not yet
begun.
The three main phases of a write-up are organizing materials so
that the work tells a story, giving this story the structure of a thesis
or of an academic paper, and actually writing. A paper or thesis,
then, is an outcome of a cycle of activity, from speculation through
definition and experimentation to write-up, with a range of obstacles
and issues that can arise on the way.
Preface
2
But it is much more than a record of the work. Although a research
paper or thesis is the result of a process of research that may have
been proceeding for months or years, with just a few pages to
represent months or more of activity by several people a paper may
be only a small window into the work that was done. A thesis is
more substantial, and may in some respects be a complete piece of
research, but even so represents a digesting of the learning and
outcomes into a relatively compact document. How to proceed to a
complete document is the topic of this chapter.
Preface 2
3
To begin a paper, the first task is to describe your aims. An effective
exercise is to write down everything that motivated you to start the
research. What did you want to achieve? What problems did you
expect to address? What makes the problems interesting? Next,
define the scope of the work that you plan to write up. To do so, it is
necessary to make choices about what to include, and thus it is
necessary to identify what might be included. Typically, by this stage
your research has become focused on investigation of a small
number of specific questions, and you have preliminary
experimental or theoretical results that suggest what the core
contribution of the work is going to be.
The Scope of a Paper
4
You might start, for example, by asking questions such as:
• Which results are the most surprising?
• What is the one result that other researchers might adopt in their
work?
• Are the other outcomes independent enough to be published
separately later on? Are they interesting enough to justify their
being included?
• Does it make sense to explain the new algorithms first, followed
by description of the previous algorithms in terms of how they
differ from the new work? Or is the contribution of the new work
more obvious if the old approaches are described first, to set the
context?
• What assumptions or definitions need to be formalized before the
main theorem can be presented?
The Scope of a Paper 2
5
• What is the key background work that has to be discussed?
• Who is the readership? For example, are you writing for
specialists in your area, your examiners, or a general computer
science audience?
The Scope of a Paper 3
6
A valuable exercise at this stage is to speculate on the format and
scope of the results. Early in the investigation, decisions will have
been made about how the results are to be evaluated—that is,
about which measures are to be used to determine whether the
research has succeeded or failed. For example, it may be that
network congestion is the main respect in which the research is
expected to have yielded improvements in performance. But how is
network congestion to be measured? As a function of data volume,
number of machines, network bandwidth, or something else?
Answering this question suggests a form of presentation into which
the experimental results can be inserted: a graph, perhaps. The
form of this graph can be sketched even before any coding has
begun, and doing so identifies the kind of output that the code is
required to produce.
The Scope of a Paper 4
7
You may be reporting a particular piece of work, but the way it is
reported is determined by the characteristics of the audience. For
example, a paper on machine learning for computer vision may
have entirely different implications for the two fields, and thus
different aspects of the results might be emphasized. Also, an
expert on vision cannot be assumed to have any expertise in
machine learning, so the way in which the material is explained to
the two readerships must be based on your judgement, in each
case, of what is common knowledge and what is unfamiliar. The
nature of the audience may even determine what can be reported.
Once the material for a paper has been collected it has to be
organized into a coherent self-contained narrative, which ultimately
will form the body of the write-up. Turning this narrative into a writeup involves putting it in the form of an academic paper: including an
introduction, a bibliography, and so on.
The Scope of a Paper 5
8
A cornerstone of good writing is identifying what the reader needs to
learn. A strong thesis or paper has a story-like flow, with a sequence
of concepts building from a foundation of knowledge assumed to be
common to all readers up to new ideas and results. Thus an
effective paper educates its readers. It leads readers from what they
already know to new knowledge you want them to learn. For this
reason, the body of a good paper—everything between the
introduction and the conclusions—should have a logical flow that
has the feel of a narrative.
Telling a Story
9
The story told by a paper is a walk through the ideas and outcomes
that explains the material in a structured way. The first parts of the
paper teach the readers the things they need to understand for the
later parts, while information that isn’t a natural part of this narrative
should probably be left out. A way to think about the starting point is
to consider the “you” as you were the day that you began your
research. Think about what you knew (and didn’t know) at that time,
and what you have learnt since; your paper or thesis is a chance to
teach the past “you” all the knowledge that is needed to become the
current “you”.
Telling a Story 2
10
Thus a paper isn’t a commentary on the research program or the
day-to-day activities of the participants, and isn’t an unstructured
collection of information and results; nor is it meant to be
mysterious. Instead, it is like a guided tour through a gallery, in
which each room contains something new for the readers to
comprehend. There is also an expectation of logical closure. The
early parts of the paper’s body typically explain hypotheses or
claims; the reader expects to discover by the end whether these are
justified.
Telling a Story 3
11
There are several common ways for structuring the body of a paper,
including as a chain, by specificity, by example, and by complexity.
Perhaps the most common structure is the first of these alternatives,
a chain in which the results and the background on which they build
dictate a logical order for presentation of the material. First might
come, say, a problem statement, then a review of previous solutions
and their drawbacks, then the new solution, and finally a
demonstration that the solution improves on its predecessors.
For some kinds of results, other structures may be preferable. One
option is to structure by specificity, an approach that is particularly
appropriate for results that can be divided into several stages. The
material is first outlined in general terms, then the details are
progressively filled in. Most technical papers have this organization
at the high level, but it can also be used within sections.
Telling a Story 4
12
Another structure is by example, in which the idea or result is
initially explained by, say, applying it to some typical problem. Then
the idea can be explained more formally, in a framework the
example has made concrete and familiar.
A final alternative is to structure the body by complexity. For
example, a simple case can be given first, then a more complex
case can be explained as an extension, thus avoiding the difficulty
of explaining foundational concepts in a complex framework. This
approach is a kind of tutorial: the reader is brought by small steps to
the full result. For example, a mathematical result for an objectoriented programming language might initially be applied to some
simple case, such as programs in which all objects are of the same
class. Then the result could be extended by considering programs
with inheritance.
Telling a Story 5
13
When describing specific results, it is helpful, although not always
possible, to begin with a brief overview of whatever has been
observed. The rest of the discussion can then be used for
amplification rather than further observations. Newspaper articles
are often written in this “pyramid” style. The first sentence
summarizes the story; the next few sentences review the story
again, giving some context; then the remainder of the article
presents the whole story in detail. Sections of research papers can
sometimes be organized in this way.
Telling a Story 6
14
Scientific papers follow a standard structure that allows readers to
quickly discover the main results, and then, if interested, to examine
the supporting evidence. Many readers accept or reject conclusions
based on a quick scan, not having time to read all the papers they
see. A well-structured write-up accommodates this behaviour by
having important statements as near the beginning as possible.
Organization
Preface
15
You need to:
• Describe the work in the context of accepted scientific knowledge.
• State the idea that is being investigated, often as a theory or
hypothesis.
• Explain what is new about the idea, what is being evaluated, or
what contribution the paper is making.
• Justify the theory, by methods such as proof or experiment.
Theses, journal articles, and conference papers have much the
same organization when viewed in outline. There are distinctions in
emphasis rather than in specific detail.
A typical write-up has most of the following components:
Organization
Preface 2
16
A typical write-up has most of the following components:
• Title and Author
• Abstract
• Introduction
• Body
• Literature Review
• Conclusions
• Bibliography
• Appendices
Organization
Preface 3
17
Papers begin with their title and information about authors including
name, affiliation, and address. The convention in computer science
is to not give your position, title, or qualifications; but whether you
give your name as A. B. Cee, Ae Cee, Ae B. Cee, or whatever, is a
personal decision. Use the same style for your name on all your
papers, so that they are indexed together. Include a durable email
address or Web address.
Also include a date. Take the trouble to type in the date rather than
using “today” facilities that print the date on which the document
was last processed, or later you may not be able to tell when the
document was completed.
Title and Author
18
The front matter of a paper may also include other elements. One is
acknowledgements, as discussed in Chap. 6, which alternatively
may follow the conclusions. Another element is a collection of
search terms, keywords, or key phrases—additional terminology
that can be used to describe the topic of the paper. Sometimes
these keywords must be selected from a specific list. In other cases,
the conventions for choosing such terms are not always clear, but in
general it is unhelpful to use words that, for example, are a
description of the experimental methodology: don’t write “timing
experiments”, for example. Use words that concern the paper’s
principal themes.
Title and Author 2
19
An abstract is typically a single paragraph of about 50–200 words.
The function of an abstract is to allow readers to judge whether or
not the paper is of relevance to them. It should therefore be a
concise summary of the paper’s aims, scope, and conclusions.
There is no space for unnecessary text; an abstract should be kept
to as few words as possible while remaining clear and informative.
Irrelevancies, such as minor details or a description of the structure
of the paper, are usually inappropriate, as are acronyms,
mathematics, abbreviations, or citations. Only in rare circumstances
should an abstract cite another paper (for example, when one paper
consists entirely of analysis of results in another), in which case the
reference should be given in full, not as a citation to the
bibliography. Sentences such as “We review relevant literature”
should be omitted.
Abstract
20
情報処理学会　600字、200ワード
通信学会　500字、100ワード
Many abstracts follow a five-element organization:
1. A general statement introducing the broad research area of the
particular topic being investigated.
2. An explanation of the specific problem (difficulty, obstacle,
challenge) to be solved.
3. A review of existing or standard solutions to this problem and
their limitations.
4. An outline of the proposed new solution.
5. A summary of how the solution was evaluated and what the
outcomes of the evaluation were.
Abstract 2
21
Thus a draft of an abstract can consist of five sentences, one
[sentence] for each of the points above. Introductions should be
structured in much the same way, but with a paragraph or two, not a
sentence, for each component. A valuable exercise is to read other
papers, analyze their abstracts and introductions to see if they have
this form, and then decide whether they are effective.
Many scientists browse research papers outside their area of
expertise. You should not assume that all likely readers will be
specialists in the topic of the paper—abstracts should be selfcontained and written for as broad a readership as possible.
Abstract 3
22
An introduction can be regarded as an expanded version of the
abstract. It should describe the paper’s topic, the problem being
studied, references to key papers, the approach to the solution, the
scope and limitations of the solution, and the outcomes. There
needs to be enough detail to allow readers to decide whether or not
they need to read further. It should include motivation: the
introduction should explain why the problem is interesting, what the
relevant scientific issues are, why the approach taken is a good
one, and why the outcomes are significant.
That is, the introduction should show that the paper is worth reading
and it should allow the reader to understand your perspective, so
that the reader and you can proceed on a basis of common
understanding.
Introduction
23
The introduction can discuss the importance or ramifications of the
conclusions but should include only a brief summary of the
supporting evidence, which the interested reader can find in the
body of the paper. Relevant literature can be cited in the
introduction, but specialized terminology, complex mathematics, and
in-depth discussion of the literature belong elsewhere.
By the end of the introduction, the reader should understand the
scope of the work, and of the problem.
The reader should also understand the contribution, that is, what the
discovery of the work is—the core idea that the referees or
examiners need to appreciate as novel and important. This
understanding requires that the reader appreciates what the
properties of this contribution are, what makes it interesting and
plausible, what method was used to investigate it, and why the
method is appropriate.
Introduction 2
24
The body of a paper should present the results. This presentation
should provide necessary background and terminology, explain the
chain of reasoning that leads to the conclusions, provide the details
of central proofs, summarize any experimental outcomes, and state
in detail the conclusions outlined in the introduction. Descriptions of
experiments should permit reproduction and verification, as
discussed in Chap. 14. There should be careful definitions of the
hypothesis and major concepts, even those that were described
informally in the introduction. The structure should be evident in the
section headings. Since the body can be long, narrative flow and a
clear logical structure are essential.
The body should be reasonably independent of other papers. If, to
understand your paper, the reader must find specialized literature
such as your earlier papers or an obscure paper by your advisor,
then its audience will be limited.
Body
25
The background material can be entirely separate from the
discussion of previous work on the same problem. The former is the
knowledge the reader needs to understand your contribution. The
latter is, often, alternative approaches that are superseded by your
work. Together, the discussion of background and previous work
also introduce the state of the art and its failings, the importance
and circumstances of the research question, and benchmarks or
baselines that the new work should be compared to.
The results section is an assembly of evidence on which the key
arguments are based. This typically includes presentations of
experimental outcomes, theorems, proofs, analyses of data, and
tabulations of investigative outcomes and discoveries. The
arguments then convey what the results mean—that is, they need to
be explained, analyzed, and interpreted. For the data, readers need
to know how the data was gathered, how they might obtain or
create the data for themselves, and background on issues such as
limitations of the data.
Body 2
26
Most experiments yield far more data than can be presented in a
paper of reasonable length. Important results can be summarized in
a graph or a table, and other outcomes reported in a line or two. It is
acceptable to state that experiments have yielded a certain outcome
without providing details, so long as those experiments do not affect
the main conclusions of the paper (and have actually been
performed). Similarly, there may be no need to include the details of
proofs of lemmas or minor theorems. This does not excuse you
from conducting the experiments or convincing yourself that the
results are correct, but such information can be kept in logs of the
research rather than included in the paper.
In a thesis, each chapter has structure, including an introduction
and a summary or conclusions. This structure varies with the
chapter’s purpose. A background chapter may gather a variety of
topics necessary to understanding of the contribution of the thesis.
Body 3
27
Few results or experiments are entirely new. Usually they are
extensions of or corrections to previous research—that is, most
results are an incremental addition to existing knowledge. As
discussed in Chap. 3, a literature review, or survey, is used to
compare the new results to similar previously published results, to
describe existing knowledge, and to explain how it is extended by
the new results. A survey can also help a reader who is not expert in
the field to understand the paper and may point to standard
references such as texts or survey articles.
Literature Review
28
In an ideal paper, the literature review is as interesting and thorough
as the description of the paper’s contribution. There is great value
for the reader in a precise analysis of previous work that explains,
for example, how existing methods differ from one another and what
their respective strengths and weaknesses are. Such a review also
creates a specific expectation of what the contribution of the paper
should be—it shapes what the readers expect of your work, and
thus shapes how they will respond to your ideas. It is where the
reader learns why the problem is a challenge and also learns about
the limitations of simple or previous solutions.
The literature review can be early in a paper, to describe the context
of the work, and might in that case be part of the introduction; or,
less commonly, the literature review can follow or be part of the
main body, at which point a detailed comparison between the old
and the new can be made.
Literature Review 2
29
The conclusions section, or summary, is used to draw together the
topics discussed in the paper. This section should include a concise
statement of the paper’s important results and an explanation of
their significance. This is an appropriate place to state (or restate)
any limitations of the work: shortcomings in the experiments,
problems that the theory does not address, and so on.
A conclusion is that which concludes, or the end. Conclusions are
the inferences drawn from a collection of information. Write
“Conclusions”, not “Conclusion”. If you have no conclusions to draw,
write “Summary”, which is often the appropriate way to end a thesis
chapter.
Conclusions
30
A paper’s bibliography, or its set of references, is a complete list of
theses, papers, books, and reports cited in the text. No other items
should be included.
Bibliography
31
Some papers have appendices giving detail of proofs or
experimental results, and, where appropriate, material such as
listings of computer programs. The purpose of an appendix is to
hold bulky material that would otherwise interfere with the narrative
flow of the paper, or material that even interested readers do not
need to refer to.
Appendices are only occasionally necessary for a paper, in cases
where there is material such as a proof whose length would
interrupt the flow. But they often have a useful role in a thesis,
where they can be used for supporting material such as ethics
approvals, extended tables of data, and transcripts of interviews.
Appendices
32
33