Week 6: Chapter 5
Writing a Paper
(Part 2)
"Writing for Computer Science"
Third Edition
by
Justin Zobel
For the first draft of a write-up you may find it helpful to write freely
—without particular regard to style, layout, or even punctuation—so
that you can concentrate on presenting a smooth flow of ideas in a
logical structure. Worrying about how to phrase each sentence
tends to result in text that is clear but doesn’t form a continuous
whole, and authors who are too critical on the first draft are often
unable to write anything at all. If you tend to get stuck, just write
anything, no matter how awful; but be sure to delete any ravings
later.
A consequence of having a sloppy first draft is that you must edit
and revise carefully; initial drafts are often awkwardly written and full
of mistakes. But few authors write well on the first draft anyway. The
best writing is the result of frequent, thorough revision.
The First Draft
2
Mathematical content, definitions, and the problem statement
should be made precise as early as possible. The hypothesis and
the results flow from a clear statement of the problem being tackled.
Describing the problem forces you to consider in depth the scope
and nature of the research. If you find that you cannot describe the
problem precisely, then perhaps your understanding is lacking or
the ideas are insufficiently developed.
The First Draft 2
3
It was said earlier, but is worth repeating: the writing should begin
as soon as the research is started. Right from the start, expect to
accumulate useful fragments of text that will later be drawn into the
finished write-up. The later the writing is begun, the harder it will be.
Delay increases the time between having ideas and having to write
about them, increases the pressure to read papers to be discussed,
and reduces the number of experiments that can be thoroughly
described. Completing your reading, for example, is a poor reason
to defer writing, because reading is never complete; and in any
case, the best way to develop your understanding of other papers is
to write about them.
The First Draft 3
4
The writing defines the research, and the one cannot proceed
without the other. Writing is a stimulus to research, suggesting fresh
ideas and clarifying vague concepts and misunderstandings; and
development of the presentation of the results often suggest the
form the proofs or experiments should take. Gaps in the research
may not be apparent until it has been at least preliminarily
described. Research is also a stimulus to writing—fine points are
quickly forgotten once the work is complete. Don’t expect the writing
to progress steadily, but do expect progress overall. If the writing
seems to have stalled, it is time to put other tasks aside for a while.
A thesis is typically completed over a much longer time than is a
paper, but the guidance on writing is the same: the real start of the
work is when the writing has begun. Being disciplined about writing
is even more important than for a paper, because over a period of
years early work will be forgotten if it isn’t captured in an organized
way.
The First Draft 4
5
However, the task of writing a thesis can be broken into
manageable stages. In a Ph.D., each chapter can be as rich as a
paper, and each is likely to be written separately. Drafting of the
technical chapters that contain the contribution tends to be relatively
easy (even though the research that underlies these chapters may
have consumed years of work), in part because you have been
immersed in this material and will find that you have plenty to say
about it. The most difficult chapter is usually the background and
literature review. The volume of careful reading can be an obstacle,
as is the need to write succinctly and fairly about other people’s
work. If you finish the background first, it will seem as if the main
task of writing the thesis is complete.
The First Draft 5
6
The introduction can be surprisingly challenging: achievement of a
conversational, natural writing style can take many revisions. But
this is where the examiner meets you for the first time and, as for
any initial meeting, it is important to make a good impression.
The First Draft 6
7
There are many approaches to the process of assembling a
technical paper. The technique I use for composing is to brainstorm,
writing down in point form what has been learnt, what has been
achieved, and what the results are. The next step is to prepare a
skeleton, choosing results to emphasize and discarding material
that on reflection seems irrelevant, and then work out a logical
sequence of sections that leads the reader naturally to the results.
From Draft to Submission
8
A useful discipline is to choose the section titles before writing any
text, because if material to be included doesn’t seem to belong in
any section then the paper’s structure is probably faulty. The
introduction is completed first and includes an overview of the
paper’s intended structure, that is, an outline of the order and
content of the sections. When the structure is complete, each
section can be sketched in perhaps 20–200 words. This approach
has the advantage of making the writing task less daunting—it is
broken into parts of manageable size—while also creating the
impression that the writing is well under way.
When the body and the closing summary are complete, the
introduction usually needs substantial revision because the
arguments presented in the paper are likely to mature and evolve as
the writing proceeds. The final version of the abstract is the last part
to be written.
From Draft to Submission 2
9
Completion of a paper tends to focus on writing of the whole
document, while a thesis is typically completed chapter by chapter.
When planning a schedule for completion of a thesis, you need to
allow time for multiple revisions of each chapter, and, crucially, time
for your advisor to read each chapter. If two weeks is a typical time
for your advisor to return a chapter, and for each of the eight
chapters there will be two versions, then your schedule will need to
include around eight months to allow for this reading and review
time—and also needs to include activities that you can complete
while you are waiting for your advisor to respond. This is another
reason why it is so important to write early.
For a novice writer who doesn’t know where to begin, a good
starting point is imitation. Choose a paper or thesis whose results
are of a similar flavour to your own, analyze its organization, and
sketch an organization for your results based on the same pattern.
The habit of using similar patterns for papers—their standardization
—helps to make them easier to read.
From Draft to Submission 3
10
Students should keep a comprehensive file of notes as they
proceed. This can include records of:
• Meetings.
• Decisions.
• Ideas.
• Expectations of outcomes.
• Papers you have read.
• Sketches of algorithms.
• Code versions.
• Theorems.
• Sources of data.
• Experiments and outcomes
• Sketches of proofs.
From Draft to Submission 4
11
Expect this log of activity to be a mixture of written material and
data. In its raw state, the content of a file of notes is not suitable for
inclusion in a paper, but the themes and issues of the paper can be
drawn from the file, and it serves as a memory of issues to discuss
and material to include.
From Draft to Submission 5
12
In computer science, most papers are co-authored. The inclusion of
several people as authors means that, in principle, all these people
contributed in some significant way to the intellectual content of the
paper. In many cases, it also means that the task of writing was
shared. There are a range of strategies for co-authoring, which vary
from colleague to colleague and paper to paper. It is not unusual, for
example, for an advisor to use a student’s thesis as the basis of a
paper, in which case both advisor and student are listed as authors.
In this process, the advisor may well dramatically revise the
student’s work, if only because a typical paper is much shorter than
a typical thesis.
Co-authoring
13
Co-authoring is a form of research training. It is an opportunity for
advisors to learn in detail where their students are weak, while a
paper that has been revised by an advisor is an opportunity for
students to contrast their attempts at research writing with that of
people with more experience. An advisor’s revision of a student’s
draft of paper can involve a great deal of work, and may be the most
thorough feedback on writing that the student receives during the
course of a research program.
Co-authoring 2
14
A thesis (or dissertation) is how research students present their
work for examination. A thesis may have longer-term importance as
a description of significant research results, but your primary goal
should be to produce a piece of work that the examiners will pass.
Theses
15
The questions that examiners respond to are much the same as
those a referee would ask of a paper. That is, the examiners seek
evidence of an original, valid contribution developed to an
appropriate standard. However, it is a mistake to view a thesis as no
more than an extended paper. A paper stands (or does not stand)
on the strength of the results. A thesis passes (or fails) on the
strength of your demonstration of competence; even if good results
are not achieved, the thesis should pass if you have shown the
ability to undertake high-quality research. Questions that examiners
might be asked to address include whether you have demonstrated
command of the fundamentals of the discipline, whether you have
the ability to correctly interpret results, and whether you have
sufficiently strong communication skills.
Theses 2
16
As the scope of a thesis is more substantial than that of a paper, the
introduction should be broad in topic and conversational in tone. It
could introduce a whole area rather than a single problem. Another
reason to develop a substantial introduction is that a thesis is a
more thorough, detailed document than is a paper. Why was the
problem worth investigating in depth? How do the parts of the
investigation relate to each other? What are some practical,
concrete ways in which the outcomes of the work might be used?
Running examples may be outlined in the introduction, to give unity
to the thesis overall. The role of a thesis’s introduction is, however,
much the same as in a paper. As in the introduction of a paper,
theory, jargon, and notation are inappropriate.
A running example is an example that is recalled time and again during the paper,
applying the newly discovered knowledge to it, presumably to show how things work.
- https://academia.stackexchange.com/questions/111966/difference-between-running-example-and-motivatingexample
Theses 3
17
Take the time to learn about the challenges that are specific to
thesis writing. Browse other theses, from your own institution, other
institutions, and other disciplines. Form views about the strengths
and weaknesses of these theses; these views will help to shape
your own work. Critically, remember that an examiner may only
have hours to read your work—you need to help them to spend that
time well.
Theses 4
18
Over the next few chapters I look at the details of how to write well
and also some common mistakes that researchers make; these
largely concern details, that is, individual elements that are poor.
Some problems in papers, however, are at a higher level, and
concern the quality of the work as a whole. As a journal editor,
conference chair, and referee, I see defects of this kind again and
again—problems that make it certain that the paper will be rejected,
and which in some cases are obvious to the referee in the first few
moments of reading.
Getting It Wrong
19
Common ways in which authors “get it wrong” are below. Many of
these issues are also discussed elsewhere in this book, but it is
valuable, I think, to consider them together. Something that can be
confronting about these issues is that, often, the authors appear to
have worked hard over a long period of time to produce a
substantial document; and yet it immediately obvious that there is
no chance of the work being accepted. An experienced researcher
may feel baffled that this has occurred—as the work progressed, did
no one see that it was going badly?
Be alert to the potential faults in your own work, and have the
courage to abandon or refocus activity that has little chance of
leading to a valuable outcome.
Getting It Wrong 2
20
When I first see a paper, impressions form in a minute or two,
influenced by layout, readability, and so on. With some papers,
though, a positive initial response is gradually followed by a sinking
feeling: I cannot figure out what this paper is about. Something
elementary is utterly missing.
Irrelevance
21
What that “something” is can vary. Sometimes there is a lack of
connection to the literature on any particular topic, and thus no
sense of what the author is trying to achieve. In some cases the
author has proposed an elegant solution, but it is not obvious what
the problem is, or the problem is so unrealistic that it is impossible
to grasp. It may be that the author has given a clear motivation for
the work, but the bulk of the paper concerns something else
entirely; an example was a paper whose starting point was the
challenge faced by teachers who wish to ensure that Web searches
only return pages that are appropriate for children, but the
contribution concerned mechanisms for selectively highlighting
passages that were relevant to the query.
Irrelevance 2
22
Another form of this are those papers that are submitted to an
inappropriate venue: work on file compression submitted to a
conference on database modelling, or work on face recognition
submitted to a journal on data visualization. Even more surprising
are papers where the authors have utterly misunderstood the norms
of research or presentation for the field, such as papers where the
authors have made no use of standard resources such as data sets,
or, for example, a paper on search technology written as a narrative
from the imagined perspective of a document.
Irrelevance 3
23
Most curiously of all, in some papers there is no obvious research
question, no statement of aims or goals, and no claimed
contribution. A more subtle problem of this kind is when a paper
appears to tell a coherent story, but on inspection it becomes clear
that, say, the experimental results are unrelated to the conclusions.
In some cases they seem to be on a different topic altogether.
Irrelevance 4
24
Some papers seem reasonable in parts, but the parts don’t belong
in the same document. A sensible, well-organised paper may be
framed in terms of grandiose, ambitious claims that can only be
described as ridiculous. Or there may be a detailed, insightful
literature review, but it is either disconnected from the contribution,
or, bizarrely, the contribution is less interesting than the previous
work that was described so well.
Inconsistency, Inadequacy, and
Incompleteness
25
For papers that are overall at a high standard, perhaps the single
commonest problem that leads to rejection is that the experiments
are inadequate. There may be an interesting method, but the
experiments are trivial or uninformative, and fall far short of
supporting the claims; often, in these cases, the problem is that the
data set used is too artificial to allow any interesting conclusion to
be drawn. Or a small data set may be used to support claims for
applications at an entirely different scale, such as a set of a few
thousand documents being used to make claims about Web search.
Or the data set may not be relevant to the problem at all. It is as if
the researchers are so excited about the ideas that they fail to see
the need for validation, and offer results that have no plausible
relevance to the paper’s claims.
Inconsistency, Inadequacy, and
Incompleteness 2
26
Another variety of inadequacy is when parts of the paper are
missing, or dealt with in a few brief lines rather than pages.
Strikingly, some papers have no literature review, or are based on a
single out-of-date textbook, as if previous or recent work was of no
relevance. But if the author cannot be troubled to properly place the
work in context of what is already known, a reader cannot learn
what the contribution is. Another common failing is papers where
the reader cannot identify what the data is (there may be 200
documents, but where from? what content? what size? and so on),
or who ran the experiments, or what techniques were tried. In the
mind of the reader, moreover, there may not be much of a
distinction between information that is missing and information that
is concealed—a line of thought that is unlikely to lead to belief that
the work was done well. And some papers just aren’t ready to be
refereed; the underlying work is unfinished and the paper is
incomplete.
Inconsistency, Inadequacy, and
Incompleteness 3
27
In the cases above, the shortcomings are not always immediately
apparent. In other cases, the paper’s problems are obvious straight
away. For example, when presented with an incoherent abstract or
introduction, the reader immediately feels that the work cannot be of
value. A reader can have no hope for a paper whose abstract
begins with the sentence: “Internet supports all type of the forms of
information that are digital, such as the pages of the Web
everywhere and also libraries and email, so it is a language of all
our information sources in a world repository that is our knowledge.”
In such cases, there seems to be a wide gap between what the
writer wants to say and the actual words on the page. I’ve observed
similar writing in students who are perfectly clear in conversation,
but in documents seem to want to pour all of their thoughts into a
few sentences. But incomprehensibility stems from many causes,
and takes many forms. Regardless of cause, if the result is a
document that cannot be read, it won’t be.
Incomprehensibility
28
The look of a document is another respect in which problems can
be immediately obvious. I suspect that many authors do not realise
how much impact defects in presentation have on readers, but the
message is clear: if something looks terrible, then the author doesn’t
care about the content; and if the author doesn’t care, then the
reader certainly shouldn’t.
There are several common forms of this ugliness. One is in
illustrations and tables: graphs that are badly designed or badly
rendered, tables that are irregular or chaotic, diagrams in which the
parts are unrelated, and so on. Another form is in layout, with, for
example, absurdly sized headings or columns that overlap. A third
form is the presence of dramatic formatting glitches, such as font
and font size changing from paragraph to paragraph. Each of these
conveys an impression of laziness.
Ugliness
29
Another kind of mistake conveys an impression of bad judgement:
the decision to use inappropriate styles of presentation. The comic
sans font has been widely mocked for its use in slides; it is even
more mockable in a paper. Other examples include use of colours
instead of italics for emphasis, comical drawings, and peculiar overthe-top jokes.
A more subtle form of ugliness is when a paper is dense with errors.
These may be errors of fact, spelling errors, garbled citations,
incomplete sentences, or any of a range of such things. They show
that the author is indifferent to the work, and the reader will respond
likewise.
cimic sans font
Ugliness 2
30
All of the issues noted in this section make it difficult to see a paper
as being of value, but, as a way of persuading the reader that a
paper is worthless, nothing is more certain than a display of
ignorance.
An example of this is when much of a paper is spent explaining an
elementary concept that will be familiar to any likely reader and
maybe even to undergraduates. While a few lines of review may be
appropriate (to ensure that terminology is correctly understood, for
example), why spend six pages of an algorithms paper explaining
the difference between random-access memory and hard disks?
Moreover, when the author gets the details wrong—and uses 1980s
literature on memory technology in a 2000s paper, to consider one
particular paper—the main effect is to reveal that the work is
unreliable.
Ignorance
31
Another display of ignorance is in relation to past literature, as noted
above. All too often, authors have either paid no attention to key
past work, or have not troubled to understand it properly and
dismiss it in a few words. It is astonishing how often authors don’t
seem to have searched for related papers; a common exercise of
mine is to paste a paper’s title directly in to a search engine,
because highly relevant but uncited papers are often in the first
page of results. When the background and literature review are
crushed into a few brief paragraphs, it is almost certain that the
author has nothing to contribute.
Ignorance 2
32
Regarding the scope of the work,
• In what forum, or kind of forum, do you plan to publish?
• Is the scope of the work well defined?
• Is there a single, clearly articulated research question or goal?
Have you identified which aspect of the work is of greatest
impact, or of greatest interest?
• What would success in the project look like? What would failure
look like? Can you anticipate the form of the outcomes in either
case?
• Who is the readership? How deep or thorough will the
background need to be to ensure that the readers fully appreciate
the work?
A “Writing Up” Checklist
33
• Do you and your co-authors have an agreed methodology for
sharing the work of completing the write-up?
• Are the roles of the participants clear? What are your
responsibilities? What activities will the others undertake?
A “Writing Up” Checklist 2
34
Regarding how the write-up is organized and presented,
• What form will your write-up take? What other paper or thesis
should your write- up resemble?
• Are you writing to a well-defined structure and organization?What
are the sections, and how do they relate to each other?
• Do the title, abstract, and introduction appropriately set the
context for the work?
• Have you identified a structure for the argument? A format for the
results?
• Have you established a connection between the question,
background, methods, and results? That is, have you identified
the shape that the narrative will take?
A “Writing Up” Checklist 3
35
• Is there anything unusual about the organization of the write-up,
and, if so, is there a reason for this organization and how will it be
explained to the reader?
• If you are writing a paper, are you working to defined length limits
or a specified format?
• If you are writing a thesis, are there formatting requirements?
A “Writing Up” Checklist 4
36
Regarding your approach to the work,
• Are you maintaining a log and notebook?
• Do you work to an explicit schedule with dates and targets?
• Do the deadlines leave enough time for your advisor to provide
feedback on your drafts, or for your colleagues to contribute to the
material?
• Do you have an effective approach to writing that lets you quickly
generate text?
• How are results being selected for presentation? How do these
results relate to your original aims? How do the selected results
relate to the complete body of evidence you are gathering?
A “Writing Up” Checklist 5
37
• Have the results been critically analyzed?
• In a thesis with multiple contributions, are they explicitly linked by
an over arching goal?
• For a thesis, do you know how it will be examined?How is that
knowledge shaping your writing?
A “Writing Up” Checklist 6
38
39